feat!: flexible config + default reporting of unused disable directives (#100)
eslint/rfcs: designs/2022-unused-disable-directive-flexible-config/README.md

- If neither the CLI nor config file options are present, the default value (`warn`) is used
- Note: There's only one underlying setting, and the config and CLI options are just two different ways of controlling it

Allowed values for the config file option:

- `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: true` - same behavior as today (`warn`)
- `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: false` - same behavior as today (`off`)
- `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: "error"` - new value (or `2`)
- `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: "warn"` - new value (or `1`)
- `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: "off"` - new value (or `0`)

Allowed values for the CLI options:

- `--report-unused-disable-directives` - existing option, same behavior as today (`error`)
- `--report-unused-disable-directives-severity error` - new option (or `2`)
- `--report-unused-disable-directives-severity warn` - new option (or `1`)
- `--report-unused-disable-directives-severity off` - new option (or `0`)

### Phases

The implementation of this RFC will likely involve two phases:

1. Phase 1: A non-breaking change to add support for the new severity levels.

> 2. Phase 2: A breaking change intended for a major release in which the default behavior is changed to `warn`.

Reviewer: Since the default behavior will be changed only for flat config users, perhaps we could change it in a minor release? @nzakas what do you think?

Author: I'm open to that. I made some clarifications for phase 2:

> Phase 2: Any breaking changes for flat config users (`warn` by default, remove redundant `reportUnusedDisableDirectives` option from `processOptions()`), suitable for a major release or potentially a minor release since the flat config is not considered stable yet.

Let me know if phase 2 should fall in minor or major release.

Reviewer 2: We can update the default behavior for flat config prior to v9 in a minor release.

If we change it after v9, then it would need to be in a major release.

Author: Sounds good. I have updated the phase 2 wording to account for this. I believe I've addressed all feedback on the RFC.

     > ...because of our semver policy, which says that bug fixes that produce fewer errors should not break builds.
4. Adopt new option design but use `off` as the default behavior. This would maintain the existing behavior for the majority of users who aren't reporting unused violations. But most users would continue to miss out on the benefit of this feature then.
5. Turn `reportUnusedDisableDirectives` into a regular ESLint rule as suggested in [#13104](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/13104). While this could enable us to reduce complexity by eliminating a config option, a new rule implementing this feature may require special case handling, and it's not clear it's possible to implement within the current architecture. It's also a larger breaking change.

## Open Questions

<!--
    This section is optional, but is suggested for a first draft.

    What parts of this proposal are you unclear about? What do you
    need to know before you can finalize this RFC?

    List the questions that you'd like reviewers to focus on. When
    you've received the answers and updated the design to reflect them,
    you can remove this section.
-->

> 1. Should we support severity numbers (`0`, `1`, `2`) in addition to severity strings (`off`, `warn`, `error`) for the config option and new CLI option?

Reviewer: I think yes, to be the same as with rule severities.

Author: Sounds good, I removed this open question.

4. Inconsistency in behavior between the CLI option and config file option of the same name which is unintuitive and causes confusion.

### New Design

We propose a new "explicit severity" design where the user can set the severity level of unused disable directive reporting using either the CLI option or the config file option. As a result, the user should always be able to achieve the desired effect (`off` / `warn` / `error`), regardless of where they set the option from (CLI option, config file option, or even from a shareable config).

We will also change the default behavior to warn on unused disable directives so that all users (unless they opt-out) will benefit from the detection (and automatic removal with `--fix`) of unused disable directives.

## Detailed Design

<!--
   This is the bulk of the RFC.

   Explain the design with enough detail that someone familiar with ESLint
   can implement it by reading this document. Please get into specifics
   of your approach, corner cases, and examples of how the change will be
   used. Be sure to define any new terms in this section.
-->

How the new "explicit severity" design works:

> - The config and CLI options are both changed to also accept standard severity level string values: `off`, `warn`, `error` (or a the corresponding number for each level)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The config and CLI options are both changed to also accept standard severity level string values: `off`, `warn`, `error` (or the corresponding number for each level)
```

> - If both options are present, the CLI option takes precedence over (overrides) the config option

Reviewer 2: For clarity

```suggestion
- If both the CLI and config options are present, the CLI option takes precedence over (overrides) the config option
```

> - If only one of the options is present, the value of the present option is used

Reviewer 2: I think this is what you meant?
```suggestion
- If only the CLI option is present, then it is used; if only the config option is present, then it is used.
```

> - If neither option is present, the default value (`warn`) is used

Reviewer 2: For clarity

```suggestion
- If neither of the CLI or config options are present, the default value (`warn`) is used
```

- Note: There's only one underlying setting, and the config and CLI options are just two different ways of controlling it

Boolean values will continue to be allowed with no change in behavior, as summarized below.

Allowed values for the config file option:

- `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: true` - same behavior as today (`warn`)
- `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: false` - same behavior as today (`off`)
- `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: "error"` - new value
- `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: "warn"` - new value
- `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: "off"` - new value

> Allowed values for the CLI option:

Reviewer 2: It looks like we are missing the updated `--report-unused-disable-directives-severity` option here.

Author: Updated.

- `--report-unused-disable-directives` - same behavior as today (`error`) (common CLI shorthand to omit the value)
- `--report-unused-disable-directives=true` - same behavior as today (`error`)
- `--report-unused-disable-directives=false` - same behavior as today (`off`)
- `--report-unused-disable-directives=error` - new value
- `--report-unused-disable-directives=warn` - new value
- `--report-unused-disable-directives=off` - new value

### Phases

The implementation of this RFC will likely involve two phases:

1. Phase 1: A non-breaking change to add support for the new severity levels.
2. Phase 2: A breaking change intended for a major release in which the default behavior is changed to `warn`.

This allows us to get the new functionality out to users as soon as possible as a smaller change with reduced risk, while also keeping the breaking change small and focused.

### Code Changes

- `conf/flat-config-schema.js` - also support string / number type
- `conf/default-cli-options.js` - use new default
- `lib/options.js` - also support string / number type and use new default for the option

>   - Something like `type: "Boolean|String|Number"` and `enum: ["true", "false", "error", "warn", "off", "0", "1", "2"]`

Reviewer: When set, CLI/API option overrides the config option. I think we should keep the same CLI/API default (`undefined`/`null`) and rather define the new default in the config schema.

Author: I updated to mention that `lib/config/flat-config-schema.js` is where the new default would be applied. Is that what you meant?

Reviewer: > lib/config/flat-config-schema.js

Yes, but I think the current version of this RFC says that the default will be applied in `lib/linter/linter.js`?

Author: Okay, I updated to mention the default would be applied in `lib/config/flat-config-schema.js`. I don't see any defaults in that file yet so perhaps you can comment here or in the implementation https://github.com/eslint/eslint/pull/17212 to let me know how to set a default there.

Reviewer: Defaults are here:

https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/main/lib/config/default-config.js

Author: Okay, I added:

```md
- `lib/config/default-config.js` - add new default value of `warn` in phase 2
```

Does the rest of the RFC look good in terms of getting to final commenting period?

Reviewer: Looks good to me, but perhaps we could treat phase 2 as non-breaking. I'll leave a question in the Phases section.

## Detailed Design

<!--
   This is the bulk of the RFC.

   Explain the design with enough detail that someone familiar with ESLint
   can implement it by reading this document. Please get into specifics
   of your approach, corner cases, and examples of how the change will be
   used. Be sure to define any new terms in this section.
-->

How the new "explicit severity" design works:

- The config and CLI options are both changed from booleans to instead accept standard severity level string values: `off`, `warn`, `error` (or a the corresponding number for each level)
- If both options are present, the CLI option takes precedence over (overrides) the config option
- If only one of the options is present, the value of the present option is used
- If neither option is present, the default value (`error`) is used
- Note: There's only one underlying setting, and the config and CLI options are just two different ways of controlling it

To reduce complexity and avoid confusion, we will not allow boolean values to be provided anymore, except during a possible intermediary [phase](#phases).

> In addition to allowing an explicit severity level to be passed to the CLI option `--report-unused-disable-directives` (e.g. `--report-unused-disable-directives warn`), we will also allow the option to be provided without a value (e.g. `--report-unused-disable-directives`) (a common CLI shorthand) which will default to `error` severity, the same as today.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this is allowed with our current system. Please double-check.

Author: `eslint --report-unused-disable-directives` works, I checked.

Reviewer: I think the question here is can we [configure `optionator`](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/main/lib/options.js) to allow `--report-unused-disable-directive` with and without arguments.

Another question is whether we should do that because the commands would become ambiguous. For example, `eslint --report-unused-disable-directives warn foo` could mean "lint directory `foo` and report unused disable directives as warnings" or "lint directories  `warn` and `foo` and report unused disable directives as errors".

Reviewer 3: I continue to find it bizarre that nonzero tools accept double-dashed argument with values without an explicit `=` sign - does eslint do that?

Author: I updated the RFC to clarify that these are the allowed values for the CLI option:

- `--report-unused-disable-directives` - same behavior as today (`error`) (common CLI shorthand to omit the value)
- `--report-unused-disable-directives=true` - same behavior as today (`error`)
- `--report-unused-disable-directives=false` - same behavior as today (`off`)
- `--report-unused-disable-directives=error` - new value
- `--report-unused-disable-directives=warn` - new value
- `--report-unused-disable-directives=off` - new value

Based on some initial testing, this should work. We can pass something like `type: "Boolean|String|Number"` and `enum: ["true", "false", "error", "warn", "off", "0", "1", "2"]` to optionator.

Reviewer 2: I think the other options don't require an equals sign? If so, this may be confusing to have one option that requires an equal signs and a bunch of others that don't.

Reviewer: `--report-unused-disable-directives-severity [severity]` sounds good to me.

If `--report-unused-disable-directives-severity` takes precedence and doesn't require `--report-unused-disable-directives` to have effect, then it might be less confusing to throw an error if both options are provided.

Do we want to keep `--report-unused-disable-directives` for convenience or just for backwards compatibility? If it's just for backwards compatibility, it might be better to mark it deprecated and remove it at some point.

Author: I was thinking about keeping `--report-unused-disable-directives` around as-is. Why?
- For convenience, since it's much shorter than `--report-unused-disable-directives-severity error` which is becoming quite tedious
- Erroring, as the shorthand does, is likely what most users want
- Avoid a breaking change

That said, if we preferred to have only one option, and were okay with a breaking change, then I would keep the shorter option name `--report-unused-disable-directives` and simply change it from accepting a boolean to the severity string.

--- 

There's the other question of whether, if we decide on two options, we should allow both options to be provided together. You're probably right that we should throw an error since it's redundant. The only reason I was thinking we could allow both is for this override situation:

```json
{
  "lint:js": "eslint --report-unused-disable-directives path/to/lint"
}
```

While playing around, the user could easily override this with `yarn lint:js --report-unused-disable-directives-severity warn` as needed. But I'm not attached to this edge case and I'm open to just throwing an exception to avoid any confusion.

Reviewer 2: To take a step back, if the default is warn on unused disable directives, then what would `--report-unused-disable-directives` do? Because it only turns on this warning, it seems like it's actually not useful anymore? Or am I missing something?

It seems like we'd just want a flat to either up the severity or turn it off?

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't the CLI flag be used to override a config that turned it off?

Author: `--report-unused-disable-directives` would continue to report errors as it does today. I have not proposed changing that default as I prefer this option to error.

To summarize what I'm proposing currently for CLI options and the use cases:
1. `--report-unused-disable-directives` - existing option to show errors (no change)
2. `--report-unused-disable-directives-severity error` redundant with above option but kept for completeness
3. `--report-unused-disable-directives-severity warn` for overriding `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: false` from a config file
4. `--report-unused-disable-directives-severity off` for overriding `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: true` from a config file (note that this RFC also makes warning the default behavior)

Reviewer 2: Okay, I think it would help to clean up the language around this because I had to re-read what you wrote a few times before I got it.

The default with no flags is to report as warnings.

When using `--report-unused-disable-directives`, the severity is upped to error from warn.

When using `--report-unused-disable-directives-severity`, you can specifically override the severity.

Do I have that correct?

Author: Yes. I need to update the RFC to reflect this design, assuming we are happy with it.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense to me.

Reviewer: Makes sense to me too.

I also think we should throw an error if both options are provided.

Author: I have updated the RFC to describe the new design we agreed on here. Sorry for the delay.

### Phases

The implementation of this RFC will likely involve two phases:

1. Phase 1: A non-breaking change to add support for the new severity levels, in addition to the existing boolean values. This intermediary, dual-support phase will give shareable configs using `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: true` a chance to switch over to `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: "warn"` while supporting both the ESLint minor version (e.g. `v8.x`) in which phase 1 gets implemented as well as the ESLint major version in which phase 2 gets implemented (e.g. `v9.0`).

> 2. Phase 2: A breaking change intended for a major release in which support for the boolean values is removed, and the default behavior is changed to `error`.

Reviewer 3: Anything that doesn't cause a CI system to break is something that's not enforced at all in practice, so I'd expect that most users would rather have that outcome.

> 2. Phase 2: A breaking change intended for a major release in which support for the boolean values is removed, and the default behavior is changed to `error`.

Author: > I'm not sure that everyone would want their CI system to break because of unused disable directives.

One of my goals with this RFC is to argue for increased strictness including that unused disable directives should trigger errors that break your lint build. So I'd be interested to gather a few more reactions to that still. But if there isn't enough support for that change (using `error`), then `warn` would be the next best thing, as long as we are okay with the downsides, including this [comment](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/discussions/16512#discussioncomment-4089769):

> Warnings were intended to be used temporarily. My belief is that using warnings long term results in people tuning them out as just console noise, so I don’t believe you are getting much benefit with long-term warnings.

---

As for this comment:

> I also think we should continue allowing `true` and `false` in config forever. There's no downside to leaving it, just as we have multiple options for `globals`.

I'm open to this, but I have some concerns:

1. `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: true` meaning `warn` is not intuitive in my opinion. People generally expect true/false to correspond to on/off, not some intermediary/halfway state.
2. `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: true` using `warn` is inconsistent with how `--report-unused-disable-directives` uses `error`. Addressing this inconsistency is one of this RFC's key goals.

So if we need to continue supporting booleans, then I would love to at least update `reportUnusedDisableDirectives: true` to mean `error`. Although, since this would of course still be a breaking change, it's worth asking again whether we might as well just remove the booleans altogether...

> 2. Phase 2: A breaking change intended for a major release in which support for the boolean values is removed, and the default behavior is changed to `error`.

Reviewer: I also think that `"warn"` should be default. That would still accomplish the goal of raising awareness of this feature, but without breaking our semver policies. For more strictness, user can set `"error"` in the config file. Setting `"error"` (or using a shareable config that sets `"error"`) would be considered an opt-in to the possibility that patch releases can break CI.

> 2. Phase 2: A breaking change intended for a major release in which support for the boolean values is removed, and the default behavior is changed to `error`.

Reviewer 2: > One of my goals with this RFC is to argue for increased strictness including that unused disable directives should trigger errors that break your lint build.

I understand your goal here, but I don't believe this is what most users would want or expect. How they use disable directives is a personal choice.

And yes, I know what I said about warnings. :) My thinking has evolved a bit while using some other tools, mostly rust-analyzer. While I did create warnings as a way to easily implement new rules without breaking CI builds, I've come to believe that there are other good use cases, and code problems that don't affect functionality seem like a good use of warnings to me.

> So if we need to continue supporting booleans, then I would love to at least update reportUnusedDisableDirectives: true to mean error. Although, since this would of course still be a breaking change, it's worth asking again whether we might as well just remove the booleans altogether...

Yeah, I think we want `true` to equal `"warn"` assuming that the new default is `"warn"`. We don't necessarily need to document using `true` and `false`. For example, we just have a paragraph at the end of the [globals configuration section](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/user-guide/configuring/language-options#specifying-globals) that says:

> For historical reasons, the boolean value false and the string value "readable" are equivalent to "readonly". Similarly, the boolean value true and the string value "writeable" are equivalent to "writable". However, the use of these older values is deprecated.

> 2. Phase 2: A breaking change intended for a major release in which support for the boolean values is removed, and the default behavior is changed to `error`.

Author: Thanks for the feedback. I have updated the RFC to use `warn` as the default and to continue to allow the boolean values with no behavior change.

Pros of the phased approach:

1. Without this phased approach, the only chance the user would have to cut-over to the new severity levels would be during the ESLint major version bump in which they were implemented. A shareable config would only be able to support the pre-implementation major version or the post-implementation major version.
2. Separating breaking changes from non-breaking changes keeps the changes focused.
3. Users can use and benefit from the new severity levels sooner, without having to wait for them in the next major version.

Cons of the phased approach:

1. Lengthier / more drawn-out implementation.
2. Complexity/overhead of supporting both booleans and severity levels during the transition period.
3. Based on searching the top 1,000 ESLint plugins with [eslint-ecosystem-analyzer](https://github.com/bmish/eslint-ecosystem-analyzer), I found only a handful of shared configs setting `reportUnusedDisableDirectives` who would be impacted by this.

### Code Changes

> - `conf/config-schema.js` - switch to string / number

Author: Updated to refer to `config/flat-config-schema.js`.

> Patch release (intended to not break your lint build)
> > A bug fix in a rule that results in ESLint reporting fewer linting errors.
> > ...
>
> Minor release (might break your lint build)
> > A bug fix in a rule that results in ESLint reporting more linting errors.
> > ...

These lines will need to be adjusted because a bug fix that causes a rule to produce fewer errors will now break builds if disable directives become unused as a result. See this context:

- <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/12703#issuecomment-568582014>
  > If we allowed for errors to be reported with reportUnusedDisableDirectives, we would limit what kind of changes we could publish in a semver-patch release (since fixing a bug that would result in fewer errors could create additional unused disable directives).
- <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/pull/14699#discussion_r650863268>
  > ...because of our semver policy, which says that bug fixes that produce fewer errors should not break builds.

#### Semver Policy Alternative 1

> One possibility for updating the semver policy is that we could consider any bug fix to a rule, regardless of whether it results in more or less violations, as simply a bug fix and therefore suitable for release as a patch release.

Author: If we end up defaulting unused disable directives to `warn` (being discussed in https://github.com/eslint/rfcs/pull/100/files#r1044770688), then I guess this discussion of changing the semver policy will become moot.

---

Regarding this requirement:

> The rationale is that we don't want to break people's CI systems. If their CI system is passing on a Friday and we do a patch release over the weekend, their CI system should still be passing on Monday when they arrive at the office.

I do want to note that "Semver Policy Alternative 2" would be compatible with this requirement that patch releases not break lint builds (any changes to the number of violations would be released as a minor release instead):

> Semver Policy Alternative 2: If we want to maintain the categorization of changes based on whether they can break your lint build, then any change to the number of violations a rule produces would have to change from being patch release compatible to only minor release compatible.

---

Regarding "Semver Policy Alternative 1":

I would find it helpful to my own understanding if you or others could elaborate on the disagreements with my specific supporting points for Alternative 1:

> Semver Policy Alternative 1: Consider any bug fix to a rule, regardless of whether it results in more or less violations, as simply a bug fix and therefore suitable for release as a patch release.
>
> - It's how I believe most of the ecosystem (i.e. ESLint plugins) treats bug fixes in real-world usage.
> - It's also similar to [Prettier's policy](https://github.com/prettier/prettier/issues/2201) that allows formatting tweaks/fixes in any type of release:
>   > If prettier produces a different output on two different versions, that's not a breaking change. Ideally prettier will never have any breaking changes, but if there are, it would be to the the API/CLI itself, not the output.
> - Some bug fixes cause a rule to produce a combination of more violations and less violations. The distinction between the two is not always clear-cut and not necessarily deserving of different treatment in the semver policy.
> - From what I can tell, attempts to work around the existing semver policy are why we have ended up with such a convoluted and unsatisfying design for reporting unused disable directives in the first place, so it could be time to rethink this constraint.
> - In addition, the current restriction of lint-build-breaking changes to minor releases already seems arbitrary, as technically, any breaking changes should be limited to major releases according to semver. This obviously wouldn't be practical for us, as it would prevent us from making any bug fixes to rules except in annual major releases. So since ESLint already does not strictly follow semver in terms of breaking lint builds, why impose this arbitrary limitation on what types of bug fixes can be made in patch releases?
> - Even today, it's somewhat aspirational to proclaim that a patch release will never break your lint build.

> One possibility for updating the semver policy is that we could consider any bug fix to a rule, regardless of whether it results in more or less violations, as simply a bug fix and therefore suitable for release as a patch release.

Reviewer 2: I'm sorry, I don't really feel like it's a good use of time or energy to go point-for-point with each of your arguments. Suffice to say, there have been a lot of discussion about semver policy and a lot of reasons why we ended up where we did. If you want to learn more, I'd suggest searching through the tsc-meetings repo where you can find both the meeting notes and chat transcripts for past meetings.

> One possibility for updating the semver policy is that we could consider any bug fix to a rule, regardless of whether it results in more or less violations, as simply a bug fix and therefore suitable for release as a patch release.

Author: Okay. I have removed the change to the semver policy.
